---
year: 2020
speaker: james_bottomley 
event: selfish_contributor 
---

Q: Could you briefly introduce yourself?

Sure, I'm James Bottomley. I've been active in Open Source,
specifically the Linux Kernel, since 1992, both as a user of Linux as
well as a contributor.  My major open source contributions were to
Linux SCSI beginning in 2002 as the Maintainer and also helping to
create the Linux Foundation Technical Advisory Board in the old OSDL
in 2006.  The latter foray into Open Source politics was where I first
became interested in the dynamics of open source communities.

Q: What will your talk be about, exactly? Why this topic?

It will be a look at how harnessing selfish motivations is very much
required for a successful open source project.

Why is complicated, but today there's a strong perception of open
source as an altruistic exercise (I keep hearing people say you should
be doing it for the benefit of the community and, indeed, a lot of
projects today give preferential treatment to "community members" or
people willing to demonstrate commitment to the community over so
called "drive by" coders who are just trying to get a single feature
in) ... even though everyone who gives this impression would also in
the next breath quote "scratch your own itch" from the Cathedral and
the Bazaar as a good motivation.  Understanding why you're contributing
and why others are contributing is vital to building trust between the
contributors in a project.  It shouldn't necessarily matter that some
contributors will only be there for a short time while others may have
given a much longer term commitment.

Q: What do you hope to accomplish by giving this talk? What do you expect?

I think it's important that the next generation of open source
developers learn from the extensive history we've built up in the last
40 years or so.  In particular the hugely important role of licences in
co-opting selfish motivations to benefit the community and especially
the role reciprocal licences played in this.  But for the UNIX wars and
BSD lawsuit, which were essentially caused partly because the BSD
licence is too permissive to provide a strong co-option of selfish
interests, BSD might have been the dominant open source operating
system and Linux just another student hobby project.

Q: What has changed over the last 20 years in the relations between companies and the FOSS community?

Certainly corporations have gone from hating open source as a danger to
their carefully built up intellectual property to seeing it as an
essential element in both their technical and marketing portfolios. 
However, again, it's very important to remember that corporations are
always in it for the money and not the community, so understanding how to
co-opt their selfish motivations for the benefit of the community is an
important function of any open source project.  Incidentally, in the
early days, convincing corporations to adopt open source was
essentially convincing them that actually contributing to open source
rather than fighting it could be better for their bottom line ... I
think I've got over a decade of talks on that topic.

Q: 2020 marks the 20th anniversary of (F)OSDEM. What contributions has FOSDEM made to the advancement of FOSS, or how did you in particular benefit from FOSDEM?

I think it's always a benefit to have a conference that's truly about
open source developers rather than marketing: by developers for
developers (or perhaps even more importantly: people interested in
becoming developers) and FOSDEM, being free and so well attended, is
probably the most successful in that regard.  It provides a great venue
for meeting your peers and talking to them.  The slight downside to
FOSDEM is that it is so huge with so much going on in parallel, so this
year, for instance, my two most important topics are containers and
legal ... and they're both going on in parallel on Saturday, so I'll
have some hard choices to make.

Q: Have you enjoyed previous FOSDEM editions? 

I have, although I managed to miss out last year, I gave talks at
FOSDEM in 2018 and 2016
