---
year: 2020
speaker: matthias_kirschner 
event: software_freedom
---

Q: Could you briefly introduce yourself?

I am Matthias and I work for the [Free Software Foundation Europe](https://fsfe.org/). In
1999 I started using GNU/Linux and realised over time that software is
deeply involved in all aspects of our lives, from devices around us to
all kind of processes. I got involved in the FSFE as its first intern in
2004 while studying Political and Administrative Science. After that I
moved to Berlin so I can better participate as a volunteer in lobbying
for Free Software. In 2009 I was employed full time and built up the
FSFE's Berlin office, and since 2015 I have been the FSFE's president. 

Q: What will your talk be about, exactly? 

The talk is about the core values of software freedom. I will raise the
question if you as a Free Software (Open Source Software) contributor
have to follow a certain development or business model, and if you have
to agree on certain positions like on privacy, intelligence services,
the military, the climate catastrophe, nuclear power, vaccinations, or
animal rights.

My main argument is that what holds us together as a group is that we
want to ensure everybody, no matter what background, should be able to
use software for every purpose. That everybody should be allowed to
study how software works, in order to share this knowledge with others.
That we allow everybody to share the software with others, whether it is
to help other human beings, or simply for self-benefit. And that we
respect that through our licenses other individuals, organisations or
governments are allowed to modify the software to fit their needs, even
if they thereby achieve goals that we might disagree with.

I will also argue that while working on Free Software / Open Source
Software, we should respect others having differing or no opinions on
diverging topics we care about, while not losing focus on our way to
software freedom.

Q: Why this topic?

The movement for software freedom is over 35 years old now. Over this
time our community got more diverse, we have contributors from many more
countries, many different companies and governments. All of those people
and groups have their own interests on software freedom topics, but also
on diverging topics. 

To make sure that the majority of humankind in the world can benefit
from software freedom in the next decades, it is important that we
attract even more people from even more different backgrounds while not
losing the focus of what we need to achieve. 

To achieve this we have to be respectful while sticking to our core
values.

Q: What do you hope to accomplish by giving this talk? What do you expect?

I hope that the movement for software freedom will continue to do our
part to empower users to control technology and not get distracted by
other causes. 

Q: You have been using GNU/Linux for more than 20 years and have been involved with FOSS since then. What has changed over these last 20 years for FOSS?

Our topic went mainstream and the knowledge we have in the software
freedom community is needed in other parts of our society more than
ever. 

Software is influencing more and more of our lives nowadays. Thereby
people and organisations start to understand what we tried to explain to
them 20 years ago and get engaged in the discussions. For example, while
20 years ago most politicians were puzzled by what this "computer nerd"
was talking about, today there is large interest in understanding how
software is influencing our society, and what can be done to shape the
direction we are heading to based on their goals. Companies, which in
the past were against us now contribute to Free Software. Political
groups such as the largest conservative party in the EU, the German CDU,
now demand that publicly financed software should be published as Free
Software by default. 

Other civil society organisations are confronted with software freedom
issues as one piece in a big puzzle how to achieve change in society.
That's also why I am arguing in my lightning talk on Saturday that those
civil society organisations need Free Software hackers. 

Q: 2020 marks the 20th anniversary of (F)OSDEM. What contributions has FOSDEM made to the advancement of FOSS, or how did the FSFE in particular benefit from FOSDEM?

FOSDEM is *the* meeting place for the European movement for software
freedom. Each year in February, FOSDEM provides the opportunity to meet
almost everyone active in the field in the same place. Others from the
FSFE and myself have learnt so much during discussions we had at FOSDEM.
We are able to meet people with whom for the rest of the year you mainly
work with remotely, new people who joined us in our work afterwards, or
who support our work for software freedom with donations. 

So at the FSFE we are looking forward to welcome you at our booth at
building K level 2 --- just look for the colourful booth with the "I love
Free Software" balloons, T-shirts, posters and info leaflets. 

Q: Have you enjoyed previous FOSDEM editions? 

Absolutely. Since 2005 I tried to participate at every edition and
always enjoyed being there. The experiences from FOSDEM motivate me and
others for the rest of the year, and give us the energy for those days
or weeks where the path to software freedom feels steeper and rockier
than usual. 

So I'd like to use the opportunity to thank all the other participants
who contribute to this experience and a big thank you to all the
volunteers who organise FOSDEM and enable all of us to be there. 
