---
year: 2017
speaker: richard_brown 
event: dinosaurs 
---

Q: Could you briefly introduce yourself?

Hi, I'm Richard Brown, a Linux geek currently living in Nuremberg. I've been a contributor to the [openSUSE Project](https://www.opensuse.org/) for over 10 years, a project which I am now also the Chairperson of. For just over 3 years I've also
been working at SUSE as a Senior QA Engineer, working with the SLE family of products and the openQA testing
platform. I'm a passionate Linux advocate who uses openSUSE Tumbleweed & Leap extensively for Dev, Test,
Production & Entertainment, while also keeping a close eye on and collaborate with other distributions and
upstream projects, after all that's what being part of a community is all about.

Q: What will your talk be about, exactly? Why this topic?

I will be talking about the proliferation of Containerised Applications, some of the benefits and risks they
bring, and discuss how they transfer responsibilities traditionally held by Linux distributions towards
Containerised Application developers. I then intend to give some advice and guidance on how these developers
might be able to cope with their newfound responsibilities by sharing lessons learned from years of dealing
with similar issues in the world of Linux distributions.

I think these technologies are amazingly exciting and are already having a positive effect on the Free/Open
Source Software ecosystem, but as with many exciting technologies I think collectively we've started answering
the question of "can we do this thing?" before properly answering "how?" or even "should we?". I'm passionate
to speak up to ensure that we consider a broader perspective before ultimately our users start getting eaten
by the problems we're responsible for creating.

Q: What do you hope to accomplish by giving this talk? What do you expect?

I'm hoping to start a debate on the points I'm going to raise and ideally I'd like to see collective steps
being taken to address them. This could be as simple as individuals keeping the topics in mind as they use
these technologies, it could be something more broader with cross-project collaboration, I guess it depends on
how many people agree with what I'll have to say.

Q: Why are containerised application technologies like AppImage, Snappy and Flatpak becoming so popular during the last years?

They make a lot of very exciting promises about software delivery and security. Who can't be excited about the
idea of distribution or platform neutral applications that don't need packagers to put together for your
distribution of choice? No more having to worry about distribution dependencies, just put everything you need
in a single blob and away you go. And then run that in a nice safe sandbox so users don't have to worry about
the software being malicious. The promises are big, exciting, and if they can deliver all they promise,
whatever issues they bring with them are probably worth dealing with, but they still need to be dealt with.

Q: What are some of the most important issues and risks these technologies bring to the table?

Generally speaking the big risk I see is the transference of responsibility for library maintenance & updates
away from the distributions that do it currently and onto the individual application developers. This is a
very important role in regards to not only ensure the application works on the user's choice of platform, but
also the security of the user and their data. As the reality of these technologies is that the sandboxing is
not wholly sufficient to ensure 100% portability or 100% isolation, these responsibilities really need to be
made clear even if they burst the myth that Containerised Applications are 'less work' for app developers.

Q:  How could software developers benefit from containerised application technologies while minimising the risks associated with it?

I'll save this answer for my session, thanks :)

Q: Have you enjoyed previous FOSDEM editions?

Thoroughly. FOSDEM is one of few conferences I will always attend every year, come rain or shine or snow. I'm
thoroughly excited to be presenting in the Main Track this year and look forward to seeing everyone there.
