---
year: 2017
speaker: robert_kratky 
event: legacy_docs
---

Q: Could you briefly introduce yourself?

I work as a technical writer at Red Hat, which allows me to combine my
passions for IT, open source, and languages. Outside of work, I like
to travel, acquire new tastes, and have a glass of good wine.

Q: What will your talk be about, exactly? Why this topic?

My talk is about the way Red Hat tech writers are attempting to
overcome limitations and deficiencies of IT documentation. We have
identified the main problems that plague many upstream and downstream
open-source docs, and we've also come up with specific methods to fix
these problems. The crux of the matter is to avoid duplicate work and
only document stuff that users really need documented. We go about
this by modularizing the docs.

Q: What do you hope to accomplish by giving this talk? What do you expect?

I want to share what we're working on and hope to both inspire other
people or projects and get feedback. I'm also hoping for a discussion
about problems users experience with documentation and any potential
ideas how to fix them.

Q: When have the tech writers at Red Hat started re-purposing
        their existing body of documentation? And why did they start this
        endeavor?

We've started working on this about two years ago, but it was slow
going at first because of resource constraints. As to why we started,
I believe I answered that above, but a short answer is: "to improve
user experience with open-source docs".

Q: What's wrong with traditional Linux documentation and why do we
        need a new kind of documentation? How have requirements and user
        expectations changed?

There's nothing really 'wrong' with traditional Linux docs, but that
doesn't mean they can't be improved. Open-source docs have always
struggled with not having enough contributors. We recognize this and
try to find a way to both cut down on the amount of docs and at the
same time improve user experience with the docs -- by carefully
targeting specific user stories.

User expectations and requirements have been changing together with
the way software is distributed and used. For example, many software
projects no longer have a regular release cycle -- instead, they're
released on a daily basis, and the traditional versioning scheme
doesn't apply. Docs that are tied to release cycles can't really
provide adequate support in such cases (not to mention that
maintenance becomes a nightmare). There are other shifts as well, and
we're trying to come up with ways to accommodate these new
circumstances.

Q: Does traditional documentation still have its place next to the newer types of documentation you're working on?

Certainly. Ours is not a one-size-fits-all solution. There are still
situations in which traditional docs come in handy. What we're doing
is developing a system that can -- to a reasonable extent -- satisfy
both worlds. It's also a question of resources, which is why we're
trying to kill two birds with one stone.

Q: Have you enjoyed previous FOSDEM editions?

Yes, very much. It's quite amazing that despite the growth of the
event, it has still managed to maintain its grass-roots atmosphere.

