---
year: 2020
speaker: thorsten_leemhuis 
event: linux_kernel 
---

Q: Could you briefly introduce yourself?

I was raised to become a farmer but instead found my way into the world
of computers. There I quickly developed a special interest in operating
systems and computer hardware. After switching (quite late… :-/ ) from
OS/2 to Linux these preferences quickly led to a strong interest in the
Linux kernel, as that's where the drivers are and most of the magic
comes from. That's why I started following the Linux kernel development
quite closely.

I make a living by writing about Linux and FOSS for the c't magazine,
which among others is famous for uncovering the SoftRAM scam in 1995.
These days it (according to our marketing people) is the biggest
magazine dedicated to computers and technology in Europe.

Ten to fifteen years ago I contributed to Fedora quite a lot in my spare
time. In 2017 for a while I took care of regression tracking for the
Linux kernel (also in my spare time), which got me an invite to both the
Kernel and Maintainers Summit.

I also like to cook (preferred cuisine: Indian) and do a lot of sports,
if time permits (Cycling, Running, Obstacle Course Racing, Badminton,
Inline Skating, Bouldering, …).

And it seems I talk too much, as that wasn't really brief.

Q: What will your talk be about, exactly? Why this topic?

The talk will look at 20 years of the Linux kernel and Linux kernel
development and how that is relevant for Linux today and tomorrow. So
stop worrying, it definitely won't be a history lesson. Sure, I'll
mention some important or funny changes and events from the last two
decades. But the focus will be on topics from the past twenty years that
are relevant for the present or the future. It's an ideal point in time
to do this, as some recent changes in the Linux kernel might turn out to
be the beginning of a small revolution.

I chose this topic because I know a lot about it, regularly give talks
about it (albeit normally more technical in-depth on recent changes),
and thought Linux kernel topics are a bit underrepresented at FOSDEM.

Q: What do you hope to accomplish by giving this talk? What do you expect?

The plan is to give an educating and entertaining talk, which hopefully
gets a few more people interested in the software that drives their
systems. I also want the audience to understand better why some things
in the land of the Linux kernel are the way they are today, even if they
might look odd or stupid to some users --- like not integrating ZFS or
deliberately avoiding to provide a stable API for kernel drivers.

Q: What has changed over the last 20 years in the Linux kernel and for
Linux kernel development?

A lot, come to my talk to learn about this.  But to give one thing
away: I'll talk about a few areas where the Linux kernel development did
not change while the rest of the world moved on. Some of these
differences from typical FOSS projects I will just mention for
entertainment, as not using something like GitHub or GitLab looks odd or
even antiquated to outsiders.

But I'll also mention differences because some bear the potential for
disrupting the FOSS world. Yeah, I know, that sounds a bit over the top,
but remember: twenty years ago a lot of people laughed about the Linux
kernel, as it still wasn't using a Version Control System (VCS) like CVS
or SVN as nearly everybody else already did back then. But in the end it
led to Linus Torvalds developing this thing called Git you might have
heard of.

Q: 2020 marks the 20th anniversary of (F)OSDEM. What contributions has
FOSDEM made to the advancement of FOSS, or how did the Linux kernel in
particular benefit from FOSDEM?

I'd say: educating the world and bringing people together in real life
is how FOSDEM has helped the advancement of FOSS most. There is simply
so much you can learn from watching the talks in the devrooms live or
via recordings later (thanks, video team and volunteers!). And putting a face
to a name you only know from IRC chatrooms or some mailing lists also
helps tremendously the next time you interact with that person over a wire.

In regard to the Linux kernel there is no easy answer as to how FOSDEM
helped. For some reason unknown to me there hasn't been a developer room
dedicated to the Linux kernel at FOSDEM for years now. But the
conference in the end definitely helps the Linux kernel too, as the
kernel is the backbone of a lot FOSS. Therefore, in the end it is often
somehow involved in lots of talks and discussions happening at FOSDEM.
That is especially true in devrooms like Graphics, Virtualization, and
Software Defined (Storage|Networking), where the kernel is quite
present. The talks there help the world understand new and cool
features in the Linux kernel. That helps these features grow and in
the end might lead to some developer improving a particular feature even
more to build something even better.

Q: Have you enjoyed previous FOSDEM editions?

Definitely! I visit a lot of talks, but also make sure I walk around a
lot to see familiar faces again and meet new people. My first FOSDEM
IIRC was the last one where the weather served us with loads of snow and
a freezing cold at the same time (I think that was 2012). Since then, I
came to Brussels every year for the Friday beer event and stay around
for the weekend. 
